Let's talk about negotiating now.
First off I am no expert in negotiating or tactics.
There are people who are better than me.
And there's a lot of cultural standards and norms that may apply.
So I'm going to tell you what has worked for me and also what I have seen work for others.
Underneath it all there are some few basic principles that can be applied.
And this common theme and common tactics is something that will help you as well but keep that in mind.
Cultures do play a big role here.
All right let's get started.
If you we're asked What salary do you want in an interview what do you say.
Think about this for a second you can pause the video.
What will be your answer when somebody asks you What are your salary expectations.
All right you thought about it.
This is what I would say.
Well I know that the average software developer in Silicon Valley.
Let's say I'm applying there makes roughly a hundred and twenty thousand a year.
So I think that's a good place for us to start.
That was it.
That's what I would say.
Now why is that.
And this goes to my very first point.
You don't want to end the conversation.
You see what I did here.
I didn't actually answer their question and say well I want 90000 per year.
All I did was do something called anchoring where I tell them this is where we want our conversation
to start.
I want the conversation to start around the number 130000 a year and I'm not saying that this is what
I want to get paid this is just simply me starting our conversation so that we can talk about things.
All I said was the average software engineer in negotiation especially when it comes to salary negotiation
you're going to want to give an actual number to end the conversation.
Instead you want to keep the conversation going by giving something like an industry average and make
it clear that you're merely starting the negotiation here and not ending it.
And that's how we start negotiating.
Let's talk about the next point we want to give a reason for everything because we all know the problem
with negotiating right.
If you say you want more salary or more vacation time we kind of sound greedy.
We don't want to sound greedy and we're money hungry and that all we do is care about these numbers
and ourselves as we know nobody really likes greedy people right.
As a matter of fact this is the main reason people don't negotiate.
They just don't want to offend people and seem mean and hungry just for money.
Instead you want to give a reason for everything.
For example if somebody gives you an offer and this is something that will talk and lead on videos and
says hey we are going to offer you $80000 a year what do you think.
Are you in or are you at instead of saying well no I need more time.
Maybe you could say something along the lines of.
Well thank you very much for this offer.
It's very generous and I'm very excited.
Potentially working with your company.
However this is a big family decision and I'm looking to work at a company for many years.
So I would like to discuss this with my wife or my partner and have some time to make sure that there's
something we are both comfortable with.
And you see what I did here.
I just asked for more time or to not give an answer right away.
Perhaps over the phone and instead speak to my partner and all I did was give a reason why I'm doing
things I'm not being selfish I don't want more time just strictly for myself.
This is something that I'm doing because I have somebody else that is involved in the decision.
And by giving a reason like that as an interviewer that makes sense right.
I mean the interviewer will be doing the same in your shoes.
Let's talk about the next point.
Always negotiate I cannot emphasize this enough.
See negotiation is is quite difficult and it is uncomfortable for most people.
Actually I've never met somebody that just loves negotiating maybe one or two but negotiating is very
tricky because it is very different between social dynamics and cultures and demographics appropriate
advice for somebody in North America who's a white male maybe different than somebody in a completely
different location.
There are so many factors at play here.
And you know your culture best but at the same time don't use that as a reason to not negotiate being
able to negotiate is present in all cultures and you got to keep that in mind.
You're never going to damage your relationship or have an offer revoked just by negotiating.
I've never heard of anybody doing that or a company saying no no no we're taking the offer off the table
because you're negotiating to always negotiate if you never ask.
The answer is always no.
And the larger the company usually the more room they have to negotiate.
I actually have a friend who works at a company where the same two Albers that had the same job description
the same responsibilities have a difference of $60000 salary difference one negotiated when they got
hired.
The other one did and the other one is going to get raises and is going to increase but it's going to
take a lot longer for them to make up that $60000 difference.
Another point and this is a very important one is be positive.
You have to realize that negotiating doesn't mean being mean.
It's the exact opposite.
You want to explore the situations that are available to you and negotiations are a win win situation.
If you go into a negotiation thinking that you have to screw over the other person or there's always
one person that went to one person that loses that's not a good way to negotiate.
Negotiation is finding a balance between what two people what and then finally when negotiating you
have to have stakes What does that mean.
No that doesn't mean delicious meat steaks means you have to have something on the line.
If there's no risk and you knew for sure that the other side would sign a contract or accept the salary.
Then what incentive did they have to offer you more if they know that you're desperate and this is the
only job that you can get while there's zero chance of you negotiating with them.
Your alternatives is what stakes are by showing companies that you have other options.
Maybe you have multiple offers or another company that wants to hire you.
You allow the person across the table who's negotiating with you to know that you're willing to walk
away from the table without a deal.
And that gives you a lot of power.
So the best thing to allow you to negotiate is to have other options.
You see recruiters are always willing to negotiate if they want you especially when they have a chance
to lose you.
Nothing makes a recruiter more angry or nervous than losing to a competitor company.
And that's why you'll see people that have job offers from a big company like Amazon or Google that
are able to get hired really easily at other companies like Microsoft because those companies are competing
with each other for some of the top developers or engineers.
And if one wants a candidate it means it's good enough for the other.
And before I finish this video I want to give another example of something that happened to me.
I once got contacted by a book publisher and they wanted me to co-author a book.
And initially they offered to pay a certain amount upfront before the book to publish and then I would
get a percentage of royalties instead of just accepting the offer.
I messaged back and said that I'm very thankful for the opportunity and it sounds fantastic.
However based on the scope of time and research that will take to write this book I would like to discuss
a higher upfront payment.
I was very positive.
I also told them that my time is valuable so I showed them States that this is something that if I do
it it will take away from my other project I negotiated by telling them that I would like to ask for
more.
I gave a reason to the fact of why it deserves more upfront payment.
And I kept the conversation going.
And because of that they came back with a higher upfront payment just by sending one email.
But now let's talk about more detail things such as handling offers and getting raises using these techniques
that we discussed.
We're going to go into the next couple of videos and see how we can apply this to real life situations.
I'll see in that one.